PEP ???: TOML (#1)
hauntsaninja/peps: pep-9999.rst

in a backward compatible way.

The ``toml`` library on PyPI supports this feature using the ``_dict`` argument.
There are several uses of this on https://grep.app, however, almost all of them
were passing ``_dict=OrderedDict``, which should no longer be necessary post
Python 3.7. There were two instances of legitimate use: in one case, a custom
class was passed for friendlier KeyErrors, in another case, the custom class had
several additional lookup and mutation methods (e.g. to help resolve dotted
keys).

Types accepted by the first argument of ``tomllib.load``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``toml`` library on PyPI allows passing path-like objects (and lists of
path-like objects, reading the first path that exists). Doing this would be
inconsistent with ``json.load``, ``pickle.load``, etc. If we agree consistency
with other stdlib modules is desirable, this is somewhat out of scope for this
PEP. This can easily and perhaps more explicitly be worked around in user code.

The proposed API takes a ``SupportsRead[bytes]``, while ``toml.load`` takes a
``SupportsRead[str]`` and ``json.load`` takes ``SupportsRead[str | bytes]``.

> While slightly opinionated, this was changed in ``tomli`` v1.2 to a)

Reviewer: Deprecation of `SupportsRead[str]` happened in v1.2.0 but support was only removed in v2.0.0.

Regarding the use of the word "opinionated": I'm obviously biased here :smile: but I think the change was "correct" not "opinionated". JSON is compatible with text file objects because it allows different file encodings and newline sequences, TOML does not.

Author: Yeah, you're right. This was copy-pasted from my more colourfully worded gist. The history here isn't really relevant, I'll just specify the reasons for the current behaviour.

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/hauntsaninja/peps/pull/1/commits/956d3bb43f0b8822ad64ad02f46f3b8b51a2f0a0

``toml.TomlEncoder``. However, we could find two instances of using
``toml.TomlEncoder`` to accomplish this kind of thing on https://grep.app, one
of which was to add support to ``toml`` for dumping ``decimal.Decimal``.

TOML is used more for configuration than serialisation of arbitrary data, so
users are perhaps less likely to require custom serialisation than with say
JSON. Support for this could be added in a backward compatible way.

TODO: talk about output validation for ``dump[s]``

Open Issues
===========

Package name
------------

Ideally, we would be able to use the ``toml`` package name. The ``toml`` package
on PyPI is both widely used and not actively maintained.

If the maintainer of ``toml`` resurfaced and was willing to give up the ``toml``
name on PyPI, we could repurpose the PyPI package as a stdlib backport. However,
this would still be breaking for users who have pinned current versions of the
``toml`` package and have upgraded Python versions. The two API
incompatibilities that most users of current ``toml`` would run into are a)
different acceptable types to the first argument of ``toml.load``, b) use of

> ``dump[s]`` if we choose not to include a write API.

Reviewer: A third very major incompatibility IMO: `tomli.TOMLDecodeError` vs `toml.TomlDecodeError`

Author: Called this out in https://github.com/hauntsaninja/peps/pull/1/commits/7dc32cdfe1486028e5a234baa4df083cd3c94ee6 (and slightly clarified in the subsequent commit)

outlined in PEP 518). Hence this is likely to be a generally useful addition,
even looking beyond the needs of Python packaging and Python tooling: various
Python TOML libraries have about 2000 reverse dependencies on PyPI. For
comparison, ``requests`` has about 28k reverse dependencies.

Rationale
=========

This PEP proposes basing the standard library support for reading TOML on the
third party library ``tomli``
(`github.com/hukkin/tomli <https://github.com/hukkin/tomli>`_).

Many projects have recently switched to using ``tomli``, for example, ``pip``,
``build``, ``pytest``, ``mypy``, ``black``, ``flit``, ``coverage``,
``setuptools-scm``, ``cibuildwheel``.

``tomli`` is actively maintained and well-tested. ``tomli`` is about 800 lines
of code with 100% test coverage and passes all tests in a test suite `proposed as
the official TOML compliance test suite <https://github.com/toml-lang/compliance/pull/8>`_,
as well as `the more established BurntSushi/toml-test suite <https://github.com/BurntSushi/toml-test>`_.

Specification
=============

A new module ``tomllib`` with the following functions will be added:

.. code-block::

>    def load(fp: SupportsRead[bytes], /, *, parse_float: Callable[[str], Any] = float) -> dict[str, Any]: ...
>    def loads(s: str, /, *, parse_float: Callable[[str], Any] = float) -> dict[str, Any]: ...

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   def load(fp: SupportsRead[bytes], /, *, parse_float: Callable[[str], Any] = ...) -> dict[str, Any]: ...
   def loads(s: str, /, *, parse_float: Callable[[str], Any] = ...) -> dict[str, Any]: ...
```

I think the default argument is not relevant, should be considered an implementation detail, and seems to be a convention to elide it.

Reviewer 2: I actually think it's more useful than the type annotation :)
If removed, the default behavior should be mentioned in the prose (even though it's straightforward).

Reviewer: > If removed, the default behavior should be mentioned in the prose (even though it's straightforward).

Yeah I think I'd prefer doing this.

The reason why I'd want to consider this a non-annotated implementation detail is that I fear one day we may find out there is some special case where `float(<insert-special-TOML-float-here>)` does not return the appropriate result or even raises `ValueError`. If it happens it'd be best to set the default to `None` and make the `None` correspond to a slightly customized `float` callable.

Reviewer 2: Ah, that makes sense!

Reviewer 2: Hm, seeing the change to the text... The same argument can be made for the recommendation to use Decimal, can't it?

Reviewer: Do you mean that `decimal.Decimal` could in theory fail to parse a TOML float? Yeah agreed. But at least that's only a recommendation, not baked into the API specification. Do you think we should change the wording? E.g. "a callable that returns a `decimal.Decimal` can be used in cases where precision is important".

Author: Made this change and adjusted the wording of the `decimal.Decimal` bit!

``tomllib.load`` deserializes a binary file containing a
TOML document to a Python dict.
The ``fp`` argument must have a ``read()`` method with the same API as
``io.RawIOBase.read()``.

``tomllib.loads`` deserializes a str instance containing a TOML document
to a Python dict.

``parse_float`` is a function that takes a string and returns a float, as with ``json.load``.

> For example, ``decimal.Decimal`` can be used in cases where precision is important.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, ``decimal.Decimal`` can be used in cases where precision is important.
By default, floats are returned as ``float`` type.
```

``mypy``, ``pytest``, ``tox``, ``pylint``, ``isort``. Those that are not, such
as ``flake8``, cite the lack of standard library support as a `main reason why
<https://github.com/PyCQA/flake8/issues/234#issuecomment-812800657>`_.

Given the special place TOML already has in the Python ecosystem, it makes sense
for this to be an included battery.

Finally, TOML as a format is increasingly popular (some reasons for this are
outlined in PEP 518). Hence this is likely to be a generally useful addition,
even looking beyond the needs of Python packaging and Python tooling: various
Python TOML libraries have about 2000 reverse dependencies on PyPI. For
comparison, ``requests`` has about 28k reverse dependencies.

Rationale
=========

This PEP proposes basing the standard library support for reading TOML on the
third party library ``tomli`` [2]_.

Many projects have recently switched to using ``tomli``, for example, ``pip``,
``build``, ``pytest``, ``mypy``, ``black``, ``flit``, ``coverage``,
``setuptools-scm``, ``cibuildwheel``.

``tomli`` is actively maintained and well-tested. ``tomli`` is about 800
lines of code with 100% test coverage and passes all tests in the official TOML

> compliance test suite.

Reviewer: Note that the official TOML compliance test suite is very much a work in progress: there are 0 test cases currently merged.

There is a PR https://github.com/toml-lang/compliance/pull/8 to add test cases from https://github.com/iarna/toml-spec-tests. These are the tests that Tomli passes.

Tomli also passes tests in https://github.com/BurntSushi/toml-test. That test set has been updated quite recently though so I'm not sure if that is true with the latest revision.

To be more accurate, we should maybe refer to this PR https://github.com/toml-lang/compliance/pull/8 here. I'll also try to find the time to make sure Tomli passes the most recent BurntSushi tests and then maybe we mention that here as well.

Currently no CPython core developers have expressed willingness to maintain a
write API or sponsor a PEP proposing a write API. Since it is hard to change or
remove something in the standard library, it is safer to err on the side of
exclusion and potentially revisit later.

That said, here are reasons to include an API for writing TOML:

Users will likely expect a write API to be available for consistency.

Empirically, writing TOML seems useful. On https://grep.app, there are about
1.3k hits for "toml.load" and "tomli.load", compared to about 400 hits for
"toml.dump" and "tomli_w.dump".

Even a simple API is capable of serving common use cases, such as testing code
that loads TOML or writing out simple or boilerplate TOML.
TODO: estimate prevalence of simple use cases

If we keep feature set narrow, a write API shouldn't be too much additional
burden. The fairly minimal implementation in ``tomli-w`` is about 200 lines
of code.

Assorted API details
--------------------

Types accepted by the first argument of ``tomllib.load``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``toml`` library on PyPI allows passing paths (and lists of path-like

> objects, reading the first path that exists). Doing this would be inconsistent

Reviewer: ```suggestion
objects, merging the documents into a single object). Doing this would be inconsistent
```

that of the third party package ``toml``. These differences are relevant to
understanding the amount of breakage we could expect if we used the ``toml``
name for the standard library module, as well as to better understand the design
space. Note that this list might not be exhaustive.

#. This PEP currently proposes not to include a write API. That is, there will
   be no equivalent of ``toml.dump`` or ``toml.dumps``.

   Discussed at `<Including an API for writing TOML_>`_.

#. Different first argument of ``toml.load``

   ``toml.load`` has the following signature:

   .. code-block::

       def load(
           f: Union[SupportsRead[str], str, bytes, list[PathLike | str | bytes]],
           _dict: Type[MutableMapping[str, Any]] = ...,
           decoder: TomlDecoder = ...,
       ) -> MutableMapping[str, Any]: ...

   This is pretty different from the first argument proposed in this PEP: ``SupportsRead[bytes]``.

   Recapping the reasons for this, previously mentioned at
   `<Types accepted by the first argument of tomllib.load_>`_:

   * Allowing passing of paths (and lists of path-like objects, reading the first

>      path that exists) is inconsistent with other similar functions in the standard

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   * Allowing passing of paths (and lists of path-like objects, merging the documents
     into a single object) is inconsistent with other similar functions in the standard
```

I think this is more what the `toml` library does with `list[Path]`

PEP: 9999
Title: Support for parsing TOML in the Standard Library
Author: Taneli Hukkinen, Shantanu Jain <hauntsaninja at gmail.com>
Sponsor: TODO
PEP-Delegate: TODO
Discussions-To: TODO
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Content-Type: text/x-rst
Created: 01-Jan-2022
Python-Version: 3.11
Post-History: 1900-01-01

Abstract
========

This proposes adding a module, ``tomllib``, to the standard library for
parsing TOML. [1]_

Motivation
==========

The TOML format is the format of choice for Python packaging, as evidenced by
:pep:`517`, :pep:`518` and :pep:`621`. Including TOML support in the standard

> library helps avoid bootstrapping problems for Python build tools. Currently

Reviewer: I wonder if we should unfold what the bootstrapping problems are and why vendoring is necessary:

A PEP517 build requires reading TOML metadata but the standard library is unable to parse it. How do you build the first TOML parser if building it requires a TOML parser? How do you build a build frontend for building the TOML parser if building it also requires TOML? etc.

``mypy``, ``pytest``, ``tox``, ``pylint``, ``isort``. Those that are not, such
as ``flake8``, cite the lack of standard library support as a `main reason why
<https://github.com/PyCQA/flake8/issues/234#issuecomment-812800657>`_.

Given the special place TOML already has in the Python ecosystem, it makes sense
for this to be an included battery.

Finally, TOML as a format is increasingly popular (some reasons for this are
outlined in PEP 518). Hence this is likely to be a generally useful addition,
even looking beyond the needs of Python packaging and Python tooling: various
Python TOML libraries have about 2000 reverse dependencies on PyPI. For
comparison, ``requests`` has about 28k reverse dependencies.

Rationale
=========

This PEP proposes basing the standard library support for reading TOML on the
third party library ``tomli`` [2]_.

Many projects have recently switched to using ``tomli``, for example, ``pip``,
``build``, ``pytest``, ``mypy``, ``black``, ``flit``, ``coverage``,
``setuptools-scm``, ``cibuildwheel``.

``tomli`` is actively maintained and well-tested. ``tomli`` is about 800 lines
of code with 100% test coverage and passes all tests in a test suite `proposed as

> the official TOML compliance test suite <https://github.com/toml-lang/compliance/pull/8>`.
> 
> TODO: check tomli continues to pass https://github.com/BurntSushi/toml-test

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the official TOML compliance test suite <https://github.com/toml-lang/compliance/pull/8>`,
as well as `the more established BurntSushi/toml-test suite <https://github.com/BurntSushi/toml-test>`.
```

Alright, I made sure Tomli passes up-to-date BurntSushi tests too.

BTW, I am a) not a native English speaker and b) haven't written much `rst`, so please feel free to change/fix both my language and markup as much as you want :smile:

This chief reason to include TOML in the standard library does not apply to
other formats, such as YAML or MessagePack.

In addition, the simplicity of TOML can help serve as a dividing line, for
example, YAML is large and complicated.

Backwards Compatibility
=======================

This will have no backwards compatibility issues as it will create a new API.

Note that we avoid using the ``toml`` name for the module, to avoid backwards
compatibility implications for users who have pinned versions of the current
``toml`` PyPI package. For more details, see `<Alternative names for module_>`_.

Security Implications
=====================

Errors in the implementation could cause potential security issues. However, the
implementation will be in pure Python, which reduces surface area of attack.

How to Teach This
=================

The API of ``tomllib`` mimics that of other well-established file format libraries,
such as ``json`` and ``pickle``.

Reference Implementation
========================

Link to any existing implementation and details about its state, e.g. proof-of-concept.

https://github.com/hukkin/tomli

> 
> https://github.com/hukkin/tomli-w

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
Perhaps remove this now that we are not proposing write API?
